Welcome to Walking in His Footsteps, a podcast
where we dive into the life of Jesus,
his impact on the world, and how his
teachings can guide us today.
I'm your host, Emma Thompson, and I'm thrilled
to have you with us.
Today we're exploring how Jesus's life offers lessons
for our personal and professional lives and how
we can show compassion to those in need.
Joining me is Dr. Michael Carter, a biblical
scholar and professor of theology at St. Mary's
University.
Dr. Carter, thanks so much for being here.
Emma, it's a joy to be here.
I'm excited to talk about Jesus's life and
how his teachings still resonate so powerfully today.
Oh, I'm pumped for this.
Let's dive right in.
So just to start us off, maybe paint
a quick picture for us.
Who was Jesus fundamentally and why was his
life so significant, not just back then, but
why does it still matter so much now?
Well, fundamentally, we're talking about a Jewish man,
a carpenter from Nazareth.
This is first century Judea under Roman occupation,
which is an important context.
He started his public ministry around age 30.
And his focus, teaching about the kingdom of
God.
But it wasn't just abstract theology.
It was practical.
Very practical.
He healed people who were sick, brought comfort
to those suffering, and he called people to
love one another.
But the message itself, it was pretty radical
for its time.
How so?
What made it radical?
Think about it.
Love your enemies, care for the poor, the
outcasts, forgive, well, forgive endlessly.
These weren't exactly mainstream ideas in that or
even our society.
That's true.
It still feels countercultural today.
It really does.
And crucially, he didn't just teach these things.
He actually lived them out.
That authenticity, I think, was key.
So people saw him doing what he was
preaching.
Exactly.
People were drawn to him because he genuinely
saw them.
The people's society usually ignored the outcasts, the
broken, the ones considered unimportant.
He gave them dignity.
He saw their value.
Precisely.
And ultimately, his life, his death, and the
resurrection, that became the bedrock of Christianity.
And his teachings, that way of living, billions
of people today are still trying to figure
out how to live according to that example,
still shaping lives.
That idea of seeing people is powerful.
Can you share maybe a couple of stories
from the Bible that really show how Jesus'
love actually transformed someone's life?
Concrete examples.
Oh, absolutely.
There are so many, but two really stand
out, I think.
First there's Zacchaeus.
You find his story in Luke chapter 19.
Zacchaeus, he was the tax collector, right?
That's him.
A chief tax collector, actually, which meant he
was probably wealthy, but also deeply hated.
Tax collectors back then were often seen as
traitors, working for the Romans, and notorious for
cheating their own people.
So definitely an outcast.
Definitely.
And Jesus comes into town, Caracal, Zacchaeus is
short, so he climbs a tree just to
get a glimpse of Jesus over the crowd.
And Jesus, he stops, looks up, and basically
invites himself over to Zacchaeus' house for dinner.
Just like that.
No lecture first.
No lecture, no condemnation, just an invitation, an
act of sheer acceptance.
And this completely undoes Zacchaeus.
Right there, he stands up and declares he'll
give half his possessions to the poor and
pay back anyone he's cheated four times over.
Wow.
So it wasn't being shamed into it, but
being accepted that caused the change.
Exactly.
Jesus' love, his willingness to associate with him,
changed Zacchaeus' heart.
It wasn't just about modifying behaviour.
It was a deep internal transformation.
That's incredible.
What's the other story you mentioned?
The other one is the woman at the
well from John chapter four.
This is another powerful encounter.
She was a Samaritan woman.
And Jews and Samaritans didn't mix, right?
Not at all.
There was deep hostility there.
Plus, her personal life was complicated.
The text suggests she was likely ostracised even
within her own community.
Jesus meets her at a well, initiates a
conversation, breaking multiple social taboos right there, talking
to a Samaritan, a woman alone in public.
He just ignored the social rules.
Completely.
He talks with her, shows he knows her
story without judgement, and offers her living water,
which is really about offering her a new
kind of life, a spiritual life with real
purpose and dignity.
And what happened to her?
She's transformed.
She goes from being this marginalised figure, likely
avoiding people, to running back to her village
and telling everyone about Jesus.
She becomes an evangelist, really.
So in both cases, it was about seeing
the person, offering dignity, and that led to
this huge change.
Yes.
Giving people dignity and hope.
Seeing their inherent worth.
That seems to be the catalyst for profound
transformation in these stories.
That really makes you think about our own
relationships.
How can we, just ordinary people, bring that
kind of compassion into our daily lives?
At home, with friends, even maybe with strangers.
That's the key question, isn't it?
And I think it starts simply, though it's
not always easy.
It begins with trying to see people the
way Jesus did, with compassion, trying to look
past labels or our own prejudices.
Seeing the person behind the situation.
Exactly.
Remember Matthew 22.39, love your neighbour as
yourself.
The crucial part there is understanding who neighbour
is.
In Jesus' context, it wasn't just the person
next door.
It was broader than that.
Much broader.
It meant anyone you encountered, anyone in your
path, especially someone in need, even an enemy.
Okay, so how does that look practically?
At home, for instance.
Well, at home, it might mean really listening
to your family, putting down the phone, making
eye contact, hearing what's behind the words, even
when you're tired or stressed.
Being truly present.
Yes.
And with friends.
It's about showing up during the hard times,
not just the fun times.
Being a consistent, supportive presence when they're struggling.
That makes sense.
Any examples maybe of how this plays out
with, say, neighbours or people we meet casually?
Sure.
Think about maybe an elderly neighbour who lives
alone.
Like there's this example of a woman named
Sarah.
She noticed her neighbour, a widow, seemed to
be struggling to carry her groceries one day.
Okay.
Instead of just a quick wave, Sarah started
intentionally checking in on her each week.
Sometimes bringing meals, sometimes just chatting for a
bit.
It wasn't a huge dramatic gesture.
It was small, consistent, intentional acts of care
born out of seeing a need.
That's loving your neighbour.
It's about noticing and then choosing to act,
even in small ways.
Precisely.
Small, intentional choices inspired by that model of
compassion.
Let's shift a bit to the workplace.
That can be a tough environment, sometimes competitive,
maybe even cutthroat.
How do Jesus's teachings, especially about humility, apply
there?
Can you really practise servant leadership at work?
It's definitely a challenge, but yes, absolutely possible
and I'd argue needed.
One of the most striking examples is in
John chapter 13.
What happens there?
Jesus watches his disciples' feet.
Now you have to understand, this was a
job reserved for the lowest servant in the
household.
It was dirty, humbling work.
And here's Jesus, their leader, their teacher, doing
it.
Taking on the role of a servant.
Exactly.
And then he tells them basically, I've given
you an example.
You should do as I have done for
you.
He completely flips the script on leadership.
It's not about power over others, but about
using your position, whatever it is, to serve
others.
So servant leadership isn't just a nice idea.
It's modelled directly by him.
Directly.
And it applies whether you're the CEO or
just starting out.
It's about humility.
There was an example of a CEO, Mark,
who made it a point to regularly work
shifts alongside his frontline retail staff.
Really?
What was the point of that?
To understand their reality, their challenges firsthand.
He listened to them, genuinely valued their input,
gave them credit.
He fostered a culture where people felt seen
and valued, not just like cogs in a
machine.
That's servant leadership.
That's a great example.
But what if you don't have that kind
of authority?
Can you still practise this?
Oh, absolutely.
You don't need a title to serve.
You can serve by helping a coworker who's
struggling with a project, offering encouragement, being honest
and ethical, even when it's difficult, maybe mentoring
someone newer.
It's about putting others' needs alongside your own
ambitions, fostering collaboration instead of just competition.
So it's a mindset, an approach, more than
just a position.
Yes.
It's about how you interact with and value
the people around you every day.
That leads naturally, I think, to another core
part of Jesus's message.
Caring for the marginalised, the poor, the sick.
He seemed to have a special heart for
them.
He absolutely did.
It wasn't just a side note.
It was central.
Think about Matthew 25, verse 40.
That's a powerhouse statement.
Remind us what it says.
Jesus says, truly, I tell you, whatever you
did for one of the least of these
brothers and sisters of mine, you did for
me.
He directly equates serving people in need.
The hungry, the thirsty, the stranger, the naked,
the sick, the prisoner, with serving God himself.
So caring for the vulnerable isn't just a
nice thing to do.
It's actually encountering God.
That's the implication.
It's a deeply spiritual act.
It's fundamental to faith in action.
He didn't just talk about charity.
He lived a life of radical compassion, reaching
out to those society pushed aside.
How do we translate that into our world
today?
It feels like the needs are so vast.
They are vast.
But the principle remains the same.
It can look like volunteering at a food
bank or a homeless shelter, donating clothes or
resources, visiting someone who's sick or lonely.
But it can also mean advocating for justice,
working for systemic changes that address the root
causes of poverty or marginalisation.
So direct help and working for bigger change.
Both are important.
I know someone, Lisa, who felt called to
address homelessness in her community.
She started a programme through her church offering
job training and support.
That sounds challenging.
Incredibly challenging.
Lots of hard work, setbacks.
But she often said that seeing the resilience
and potential in the people she was helping,
seeing them find hope again, it completely transformed
her own faith.
She felt she was meeting Jesus in them,
just like Matthew 25 says.
That's powerful.
But it also brings up that feeling many
of us have, wanting to help but feeling
overwhelmed, like, I don't have enough time or
I don't have enough money.
What difference can I really make?
The scale of need seems paralysing sometimes.
That's such a common and understandable feeling.
It's easy to look at the world's problems
and just feel small, insufficient.
But here's the thing.
Jesus never asked any one person to solve
everything.
He didn't expect us to fix the whole
world single-handedly.
No.
He asked us to be faithful with what
we do have, however little it might seem.
There's that story in Luke 21 about the
poor widow at the temple.
The one who gave the two small coins.
That's the one.
While wealthy people were putting in large sums,
she puts in two tiny copper coins, basically
all she had to live on.
And Jesus points her out and says she
actually gave more than all the others.
Because she gave sacrificially out of her need,
not just her excess.
Exactly.
It wasn't about the amount.
It was about the heart, the willingness to
trust.
It shows that the value isn't necessarily in
the quantity of our contribution, but in the
spirit behind it.
So the takeaway is, don't let feeling like
you don't have enough stop you from doing
something.
Precisely.
Start small.
Buy that coffee for the person on the
street corner.
Offer a genuine word of encouragement to someone
who looks down.
Volunteer an hour if you can't volunteer a
whole day.
Listen compassionately.
These things matter.
They create ripples.
Small acts have value.
Immense value.
And, you know, if you're feeling overwhelmed or
unsure where to start, the Bible encourages us
to ask for guidance.
James 1.5 promises that God gives wisdom
generously if we ask.
Pray about it.
Ask where you can best use the gifts
and resources you do have.
That's really encouraging.
Don't get paralysed.
Just start somewhere with the right heart.
That's the essence of it.
Be faithful with what's in front of you.
This has been so insightful.
Before we wrap up, if there was one
core message, one big takeaway you'd want listeners
to hold on to from Jesus's life about
living out this love every day, what would
it be?
I think boiling it all down, it comes
back to love in action.
That phrase really captures it.
Jesus's life wasn't just about nice ideas or
warm feelings.
It was love embodied.
Love made tangible.
Yes.
Love for God, certainly, but poured out intangible
love for others, especially those who were hurting
or overlooked.
He gave that famous new command in John
13.34. What was that again?
A new command I give you, love one
another as I have loved you, so you
must love one another.
That's the blueprint.
It's about loving others with that same kind
of sacrificial, compassionate, active love he demonstrated.
As he loved us.
That's a high bar.
It is.
We'll do it imperfectly, no doubt, but if
we genuinely lean into that, if we try,
even stumbling along the way, to let that
kind of love guide our actions, our relationships,
our choices, it changes us, and it really
does start to change the world around us.
One act of love, one person at a
time, it's incredibly powerful.
That's beautiful.
Dr. Michael Carter, thank you so much for
this conversation.
I'm already thinking about how to live this
out in my own life, and I bet
our listeners are too.
Folks, if you enjoyed this episode, share it
with a friend, and join us next time
as we dig deeper into Jesus's parables and
what they teach us.
Until then, keep walking in his footsteps.